What experiences did you have with the low-income
government? Okay, well, a lot of our, well, first
of all, all of our projects had to be approved by
them. Secondly, in order to kind of reinforce this
image that, you know, it was them that was actually
giving all of this aid to the local people. In other
words, it was the American government giving aid
to the royal government, which was then handing it
over to... The people that a lot of the projects, in
fact, almost all the projects I worked on, had to
have not only law government approval, but law
government involvement. Now, some of the places I
worked, there were, in effect, no law government
officials or next to none, and it was in part
because either the areas were too primitive or too
unsafe. In other places where I worked, they were
all over the place, and... A couple of jobs that I
worked while I was there, I worked daily with
somebody in the Lao government. I helped do a
census in between the time I got run out or shot out
of this area and was waiting for a new field
assignment. They decided that they ought to put me
in a city where it was nice and safe
so I could calm down a bit. In the meantime, they
could find me something new back out in the
countryside. So I worked, oh, I've forgotten how
long it was, about eight weeks, I guess, with a Lao
government project in which they were doing the
first census of the second largest city in the
country. And in fact, it was more the Lao
government's project than ours and mine. since I
got in at the last minute my role, and it was pretty
minimal. And then there were other times in which I
wasn't working with government officials so much
directly, but there would be a local military
commander who would be basically the kingpin of
the area. And we would, in effect, have to get his
permission to do things. And in one case in
particular, a place where I worked 14 months, The
guy wanted it to be very clear to local people that
we were, that he was a top dog there, and that
anything that we, the two Americans did there, was
only done because he had given his permission. And
so we had to learn to basically go through a kind of
public ritual with the guy. In fact, he enjoyed
giving the impression that the things we were
working on were his ideas. And again, that was just
something that I had to learn to live with. He was
kind of a jerk, although given the kinds of
military commanders that were around, he was, in a
lot of ways, a lot more benign than a lot of the
others. But he was no knight in shining armor. At
any rate... we frequently had to go to him and
convince him that something we wanted to do was a
good idea. That often meant literally getting
drunk with a guy and after a time you could convince
him to do almost anything and then he would sort of
publicly announce that he had decided to you know
either dig wells or you know, grow rice or whatever
it was we wanted to do, and then he would say
something like, well, you know, the two Americans
are going to run this. But it all had to appear to
locals, at least on the surface, that he was coming
up with all these ideas, and he was basically
delegating us to do kind of the dirty work. So we
were involved in that fashion, and then Last but
not least, we were somewhat dependent on the local
military and commanders for our safety. Although
when I was attacked, we were within 200 yards of a
military camp and it didn't stop people from
coming into our backyard and taking a shot at us.
And having military protection didn't keep this
19-year-old kid from being killed four miles from
where I live. And later on, a boat driver within a
mile of my house being assassinated.
In fact, to protect us, in one of the places I
worked, they put a minefield right behind our
house because we were right on the edge of a jungle.
And one of the things that eventually drove us away
from that place was that... There was a lot of
activity going on, and animals would set off mines
at night, and we had gotten so gun-shy.
Increasingly, our radius of operation had been
shrunk because our safety was no longer
guaranteed, and we were down to just a couple of
miles from where we were living, and since most of
the people we were working with on a daily basis
were farther out than two miles from our a home that
the people we lived among most immediately were
among the least cooperative.
So not being able to work and being scared to death
all the time with animals tripping off lines at
night, we finally left that particular place. So
our involvement with the Lao government was
fairly extensive.
Oftentimes, not because we wanted to, but because
we had very little choice. We went ahead and did
things, but we frequently had to include them in
some fashion, or get their permission, or that
sort of thing. What was the attitude of the U.S.
government towards the Irish?
Well, I mean, I guess the official policy was to
keep the country from falling into communist
hands.
Sort of unofficially, the attitudes vary widely.
Like I said, some of the people that I worked for
within AID were former volunteers. Some of them
were like us in IBS, tend to be neutralists and were
there simply to help the people. There were also
people within AID who were hawks with regard to the
war. One guy I worked for sort of indirectly used to
look at the map of Laos and say, gee, look at all this
rice land. Wouldn't the Chinese just love to have
their hands on it? It's a good thing we're here kind
of thing, in other words. You could surmise from
that that if we weren't there, the Chinese would,
the communist Chinese would take over the country
because of the rice land. It was always kind of a A
joke to me because Laos is almost 80% mountainous.
There's very little rice land there. It's really
not worth taking over. It's more of a burden. One of
the reasons we were paying almost 100% of the royal
government's daily bills is because there was no
natural resource base. And now the Soviet Union is
having to do what we were doing for the Royal Lao
government, they're having to do for the
Communist government. I mean, those people are
dealing with the same resource base, which is
non-existent. And so, you know, just a country
without any kind of sound financial basis for
existing.
What was that to you, the Russian people, for the
U.S. government? Well, you know, the people I
dealt with, the imperialists, It's one of the
things that was hard to talk to people about
because a lot of them were unsure about who I was
exactly. And I also gathered that most local
people were interested in local things, not
national. Most people didn't have any kind of
national identity or even sense of citizenship.
Their world tended to be a very small, isolated
place Valley, most of them were isolated from the
outside world. I mean, we were flying in, that kind
of thing. They didn't have cars or donkeys or
horses, so they, for the most part, didn't know
much about the outside world. So an awful lot of
them were pretty indifferent towards the
American government. They knew that the American
government was in the country. Many of them just
assumed that... the American government was
there in the same capacity that the French were. In
other words, we had come and taken over. A lot of
people weren't bothered by that because, again,
it didn't touch, as long as it didn't touch on their
everyday life, they didn't much give a damn what
was going on in the city or somewhere else because
it didn't affect their everyday attempts to
survive. There were some people... who did have a
sense of nationalistic feeling and were
anti-American, just like they were anti-French
prior to the French leaving the place. And then
there were people, I even had a guy working for me,
who said, gee, I'm glad you guys took over our
country, because eventually I'll be able to
become an American citizen and go to the United
States. So it was really kind of a mixture of
viewpoints. But I found that among local military
types, for instance, most of them were people who
were drafted at gunpoint by one side or the other,
and frequently they wound up changing sides from
one side to the other, either voluntarily or
involuntarily. And I found that even among the
troops, there wasn't much of a commitment to one
side or the other. There wasn't, again, any kind of
sophisticated understanding of... You know, the
American government
or communism or democracy was frequently, well,
you know, I was fighting for this side because they
were the ones that caught me in the field while I was
flying and said, you either fight for us or we'll
shoot you on the spot. And both sides were doing
that. I talked to people who had fought for the
communists and had switched sides, and it was
because the communists couldn't give them
uniforms and didn't feed them and the other side
did. So, for the most part, people, at least at the
local level, weren't very ideological.
Occasionally, you'd run across somebody whose
family had been abused in some fashion or another
by one side or the other, and so they had a kind of a
personal, you know. I met a guy who was fighting on
the Lao government side whose family had been
killed in a French bombing raid and had fought for
the communists for a long time. And then he was sent
to North Vietnam for further training and was so
upset by what he saw that he decided that even
though he didn't like the French or the Americans
that much, that they were the lesser of the two
evils. So there was really a real mix of feelings.
There wasn't any kind of uniform. But I'd say the
vast majority of people didn't care much one way or
the other. when I went to a lot of areas, especially
when I was just learning languages and didn't
speak too well and wasn't easily understood. Most
people just ignored me. I worked at the first place
I had any chance to stay long enough to do anything.
At first, most adults wouldn't talk to me at all.
And I don't think it was so much fear as it was just
kind of indifference. And so for a long time, A lot
of kids, I had a kerosene-operated refrigerator,
which I could make ice, and I would give ice to kids.
And so they would hang around, and they would teach
me. I'd get a chance to practice my language, and
they were teaching me more vocabulary and so on and
so forth. And they would kind of follow me around,
and these kids got the nickname of being the
Americans' Little Soldiers. These kids would
kind of troop behind me in a line.
Well,
again, most of them were indifferent to it.
They didn't get much out of it. Even
though there was an elected parliament and that
sort of thing, most of the places I worked, people
were either so isolated they had never had a chance
to vote, or they did, but it was kind of meaningless
to them.
There were, again, some people who didn't like the
Lao government because it had interfered in their
lives in some fashion. And then I guess there were
others who felt some loyalty to it because they had
gotten some specific benefit. But again, in a
country that's, in effect, as backward as one like
Laos, most people just didn't have experience
with government. The country was just too poor.
for there to be very many government officials out
and among the local people. Everybody knew who the
king was, and the king was very popular. A
reproduction of his photograph was in just about
every house that I was ever in. But the king was a
figurehead.
In terms of the real government, a lot of people
didn't know who. who was even in charge of them. Did
this attitude carry over towards the Vietnamese
people? Well, most of the people, most of the Lao
that I knew, their emotions towards the
Vietnamese could be summed up with one word, and
that was fear. Most people I knew were afraid of the
Vietnamese. partly for historical reasons and
partly for contemporary ones. Historically, the
Vietnamese have made inroads into Laos. The
Vietnamese have been historically
expansionistic. So have the Thai, and between the
Thai and the Vietnamese, Laos being rapidly
gobbled up. The French came in and made a colony out
of Laos largely to keep it out of the hands of the
British. Nobody really wanted Laos because
there's nothing there. It's a money-losing kind
of a proposition. On the other hand, the French had
Cambodia and Vietnam, and the British were in
Burma, and they didn't want the British in Laos and
then have the British right next door. And so there
was a French explorer, who did some mapping of the
country, and it was he and some government
officials in France who convinced the French
government in the late 19th century that Laos was
worth basically colonizing, but the French never
invested very much money into the place.
Did you ever have any experience with U.S. troops?
The only experience I had was when I was evacuated
Well, I had a couple. I was evacuated by American
soldiers flying a couple of helicopters when I was
shot at during my first temporary assignment. And
then one time we had
again made one of our daily radio check-ins. We had
to do it twice a day. We had mentioned some attack
that we had heard about that had happened about 10
miles from us. And we just, again, reported it
because we felt like we needed to keep tabs on this
sort of thing for military purposes. We were,
again, reporting this kind of thing so that there
was some sort of pattern formed and somebody who
knew more about military matters than we did could
say, well, you know, it looks like things are
heating up. You guys better get out of there.
Somebody wouldn't say that. Well, one time when
both the guy that I was working with and I were in the
capital for R&R, they made us come out the bush
about every six weeks or so, at least for a
weekender to relax. And we were called into an
office. One of our aid supervisors took us over to
an obscure little office on aid compound. There
were a couple of guys in there with American...
military uniforms on, and they started quizzing
us thoroughly about this mortar attack and
ultimately accused us of being liars because they
said, well, based on our information, this never
happened. And we said, look, we weren't there. We
just report what we heard. But they were, for some
reason, very upset with us. But it was quite clear
at that time that the American military was
monitoring the calls that we made to our aid
supervisors, and they were using information
that we were passing along for our safety
purposes, you know, for their own purposes. And in
some of the bars I wound up, I met embassy guards.
Every day we could see American fighter bombers
flying into Laos, and it was pretty clear that they
weren't flying given the direction they were
flying. They weren't flying to North Vietnam.
They were flying to somewhere in Laos. And it turns
out that we were illegally bombing Laos, not only
during the time I was there, but before I was there
and after I was there. And I have learned,
subsequent to my being there, that we dropped more
bombs on Laos, more tonnage of bombs on Laos than we
actually did on the two Vietnams.
Did you have any experience with the Vietnamese
troops? No, other than it may have been Vietnamese
troops who shot at us. You know, we knew at the time
in places where we were working that there were
Vietnamese advisors working with the local
communist forces. But I never, thank God, met any
of them because if I would have gotten that close to
them, I wouldn't be alive. There were
Vietnamese... all over Laos who were there as
immigrants. In fact, the entire middle class of
Laos, in terms of merchants, were either Chinese,
Indian, Pakistani, or Vietnamese. There were
hardly any indigenous or Lao merchants. They were
rare indeed. So a lot of restaurants I ate at were
run by Vietnamese. Stores I bought things in were
run by Vietnamese. But that was really the only
direct contact I had with them. Well, things
were deteriorating rapidly. When I left, it was
pretty clear that, you know, the Vietnam War was
not going well for the United States, and it was the
Civil War in Laos, you know, the two sides being
backed by the Vietnamese and Americans,
respectively. that the Vietnamese backside was
winning. And apparently it was because the
Vietnamese were just tough individuals. There
were all sorts of stories about when a Lao outpost
would hear that they were going to be attacked and
would hear that the troops that were going to
attack them contained Vietnamese, they would
just bug out. They would take off because... They
were afraid. I never witnessed this, but there
were stories about this all the time. And I did know
that in some places...
Okay. Let's see. Oh, yeah. Okay. So it was clear
that the other side was winning. By the time I left,
IBS has a voluntary group had pulled itself out of
rural programs. We had just too many people being
killed. We couldn't protect ourselves anymore.
Before I left, I lost another couple of friends,
and that was kind of the straw that broke the
camel's back. Our organization sort of got
together and decided to tell the American
embassy, what we would do and not do, and it was
pretty much unacceptable to them, and so they
basically eliminated all of our field positions,
and they kept for the remainder of the time that the
American aid program was there, which was up until
about 1975, only school teachers. So, you know,
when I left, that process was underway.
Well, I was sort of against it when I got there, and
by the time I left, I was really against it. I mean, I
wasn't a supporter of the communists. I didn't
think they were, and I didn't think it was
especially desirous that they take over. On the
other hand, local people didn't seem to care one
way or the other. And
for a lot of local people, the communist
government wasn't going to be any worse than what
they were having to deal with when they dealt with
the royal Lao government. But I basically felt
like if the Lao weren't willing to do a better job of
defending themselves, we couldn't do it for them.
A lot of people spent time trying to propagandize
and basically warn the Lao people what they could
expect, and it just I guess, wasn't believed or
people didn't care enough.
So I sort of felt like, you know, the communists are
going to take over. There's not much that can be
done about it. And probably the best thing for all
is just for the war to end as fast as possible. You
know, put an end to the killing that was going on.
There wasn't a lot of death in Laos because, as I've
tried to indicate, though, the Lao went out of
their way to fight, out of their way to avoid
fighting the Vietnamese. And in a couple places I
worked, the story was that the two sides sort of let
one another know on what days they were going to be
in certain areas, and that way the other side could
avoid stumbling into that area and running across
the other guys and then being forced into a
firefight. And that Those, you know, again, I
don't have any verification of this, but just kind
of my feeling about people there and things that
they said gave me the idea that those stories
weren't too far-fetched, that people really
weren't involved in the war. They were draft, you
know, the vast majority of people were draftees
into something they didn't give a damn about, and
their main goal in life was to survive, you know, to
avoid any kind of life-threatening situation
that they could, and to get out of the military as
fast as possible and go back to farming. So, you
know, with those kinds of orientations, I mean,
that's what they wanted. They wanted the war over
with, and so I felt like the war ought to wind down as
rapidly as possible. And it dragged on another...
five years after I left, or four years, and then
there was an armistice. In fact, I managed to go
back in 1973, and there was kind of a rough peace,
and I was actually able to travel to places on the
ground, you know, in public transportation that
I'd never been able to visit when I worked there
officially. In such a fashion, I would have been
shot, but under the circumstances, I was actually
able to go about 100 miles into the jungle to some
places I'd work, in effect by taxing.
That
is all the questions I have. Is there
anything that we have not talked about that you'd
like to talk about? Well, I can't think of
anything. Oh, I wanted to mention something. My
draft board was in Pasadena, California, which
is, there are several places in California that
are famous for their conservatism. Pasadena,
California is one of them. That's where my draft
board was located. And they had, as I said when we
started, told me, no, sure, go off for two years and
do your thing. You're going to have to come back
after two years, and then you're going into the
Army. But at the end of my two years, of course, the
war was still going on, And so I asked to stay a third
year. I knew that unless there was some kind of
letter to my draft board, they were going to say,
now you're done playing good guy. You've now got to
do what everybody else of your age and sex does, and
that's join the military. While I was working in an
area, there were only two of us, and it was indeed a
place that had once been in the hands of the
communists. And so the guy that I worked for simply
wrote a letter to my draft board saying that I was
one of two young Americans living in an area
recently taken out of the hands of the communists,
and we were the only two representatives of the
American government there. And I got a letter back
from the draft board saying that I was permanently
deferred. In other words, what in fact they were
saying is that what you're doing is, as far as we're
concerned, the equivalent of going to Vietnam And
so stay there. We're not going to draft you. So I
stayed another year. It turns out that right after
that happened, we had to evacuate. The area was
just too unsafe. And I worked in another place,
which eventually became too unsafe and finally
wound up in a city the last few months while I was
there. And I guess that was it. Thank you very much
for interviewing with me. You're welcome. I
enjoyed it. I did, too.